This glass-story?
I am sure you all know it!
There is a Glass of Water…
The Optimist says it is Half Full.
The Pessimist?
Says it is Half Empty.
The Realist walks in.
He observes that it is a Glass with Water
in it.
Nothing more!
At that time, a Sceptic comes and he quips:
Hey, are you sure there is WATER in that Glass?
Is it GLASS by the way??
The Physicist comes.
And he says there is nothing empty there..
It is a glass with water in liquid state in
the lower half, and probably air and vapour
in gaseous state in the upper half.
The Mathematician comes.
She says, the Glass is twice as large as it
needs to be!
At that time, .. Mom comes in and says, “Who
was it again??
Didn’t you know, if you drink water using
this tumbler, you need to return it to the
place it belongs?”
Namaste!
Four hundred and twenty five is about that
Glass of Water.
Half-Empty..!
The Pessimist’s opinion.
The thing is, the Internet, if you go looking,
is filled with all this positivist thought.
Confidence, happiness-boosting, motivation,
belief, inspiration, enthusiasm, … they
just STUFF you with it!
Books of all kinds!
They abound!
From Norman Vincent Peale!
Titles like The Magic of Believing, How to
Stop Worrying and Start Living..
The Power of Your Subconscious Mind, Think
and Grow Rich by Napoleon Hill, .. in fact,
there is a book with a title that says, “Your
Glass Is Half-Full!”
Turn in any direction, and you have a book
there waiting for you!
So many!
In fact, somebody has defined pessimism thus..!
Elbert Hubbard says, “A pessimist…
Who is he?
He is a man who has been compelled to live
with an optimist”.
You just need to stick around with an Optimist
for a period of time, and you will invariably
turn into a Pessimist.
That is because, most of the time, that guy
will talk about impossible things, miraculous
things, all the time.
Half of them won’t even come to be..!
So, this guy starts becoming a Pessimist simply
because of the close contact with an Optimist.
In Pessimism, there is a special type… actually
a good type of Pessimism.. not the type this
lady is demonstrating, filled with paranoia
and trepidation.
It is called Defensive Pessimism.
This person, Bob Knight, has written about
it in great detail.
He is a basketball coach.
And, not a plain-vanilla basketball coach
either!
He is one of the “winningest” basketball
coaches in NBA history.
So many awards.
Hall-of-Famer!
He, while talking about his coaching methodology,
underlines the Power of Negative Thinking!
“When I start planning for a game, we don’t
plan to win.
We plan to not lose!
We just focus on where all it can go wrong!”,
he says.
For according to his observations, most games,
they aren’t won on court, it seems.
They are lost.
One team screws up, and as a result, the other
one wins.
Not because the other team played well!
“So, we sit down and evaluate where we can
go wrong and we just knock them off one by
one..”
The Power?
Of Negative Thinking!
This man is Hans Rosling.
He is a scientist.
A data scientist.
In the Bill Gates’ list of hugely-recommended
books, his book, Factufulness, was prominently
featured.
In the introduction to that book, Hans would
say, “I am not a Pessimist.
I am not an Optimist either.
I would like to look at myself as a Possibilist.
This ALSO is possible.
This might ALSO happen.
That is how I approach it!”, he says.
His book is about Ten Reasons We’re Wring
About The World — And Why Things Are Better
Than You Think!
He talks about population, health, electronics,
technology progress, and so on, in the book.
I strongly recommend you take a look at it.
The same Bill Gates highly recommends another
author too.
By name Vaclav Smil.
This Vaclav Smil has written more than sixty
books!
He is a data-guy.
Just flipping through this book, it will become
apparent how much he believes in the power
of data.
Hans Rosling … Power of Visualisation.
If you watch any of his TED Talks, that’s
what you will understand immediately.
This man is more of a data scientist.
He doesn’t really believe he can convince
you with Visualisations.
He expects you to be data-numerate.
He eggs you on to come over, and swim in the
data!
The volumes of data he has peppered this book
with.
He has written a book called “How The World
Really Works”.
He talks about seven things in this book,
and this book too, comes strongly recommended
by Bill Gates.
These are the seven things that are covered.
One chapter talks about Fuel and how everybody
wants it to be replaced by Electricity, … and
our man says, “No, wait.
Don’t expect anything to happen in a blink.
It is going to take time.
It will happen only very gradually.
We can’t change our dependence on fossil
fuels overnight.
Just because we purchase an electric bike,
don’t expect the world to reflect that change
immediately!”
The next chapter is about fossil fuels and
its connection with the food you eat.
Particularly the non-vegetarian food you eat.
He piles the data up skyhigh.
“Look at this.
Look at the bread on your plate.
The fish on your dining table.
The chicken.
The meat.
The barbecue.
The beef.
Do you know how much fossil fuel is spent
fishing for this?
Or hunting for it?
Or growing it?
Feeding it?
Cutting it?
Transporting it?
Cooling it?”
The list is overlong!
Oh my god, you start wondering, should we
turn vegetarian instead!?
The next chapter is about four pillars of
civilisation.
“If a country has to progress, … you can’t
just base it on progress you see in Whatsapp,
the internet, artificial intelligence, and
so on.
That’s not enough.
Don’t think you have progressed, based on
those measurements!
Don’t think the world has dematerialised,
already!
Don’t foolishly think that what was on paper
has now become completely digital, and so
your job is done!
Even today, at a global level, for progress,
for civilisation to subsist, you need four
pillars.
And only if you make enough of these four,
can you thrive.
He talks about Steel, Cement, Plastics, and
Ammonia.
Fundamental materials needed for construction,
for packaging, for agriculture.
Back to basics!
You find yourselves shaken up.
Ouch..
Are these what my focus should have been on
all along?
And, I have been dabbling on unnecessary pursuits?!
And then, he talks about De-Globalisation.
Too often, we get into this “globalisation
trap”…
That we should conduct all kinds of business
only globally.
That we should drop country boundaries.
We should always sell our goods to anybody
in any place in any corner of the world…
But, hang on..
At one point..
(Particularly Covid.. this book was published
post-Covid!)…
when Covid hit us.. we realised that 70% of
rubber gloves for world consumption… and
an even higher percentage of respirators…
they were made in, not one country, not one
state or city, one FACTORY!
Everything was being manufactured in one factory,
and was being transported world-wide.
A Covid pandemic reminded us how tenuous,
how weak, how thin that ice was.
We woke up to the realisation that we should
manufacture this ourselves.
We have to MAKE!
That realisation was reached.
And, the author says, we have reached the
point of peak globalisation.
We may no longer be greedy to global for everything,
he says.
And then, he talks about viruses, solar flares,
and all kinds of “doomsday scenarios”.
If you watch the Contagion movie, you will
see the exact same sequence of events from
the Covid pandemic!
And, very similarly, a movie called Knowing,
talks about the real and present danger of
a solar flare disrupting all telecommunication
in the world.. for an extended period of many
days!
How many deaths!
How much disruption!
Economies can be brought down to their knees!
So, are these never to ever happen again?
Or, is the next pandemic just around the corner?
Will we be ready, if one arrives?
Nothing can really be avoided.
Risk-free is simply impossible.
Don’t even hope for it.
All you can do, with all these technologies
and innovations?
Is just mitigation of risk.
Management of risk.
Prepare yourself well for that, he says.
And then, he talks about that little pale
blue dot we call home.
Just because some crackpot talks about taking
everybody to Mars, don’t fall for it!
For it to be a practical facility available
commercially, within the purchasing power
of common man, it is going to take ages..
Not in our lifetime..
Probably centuries, he says.
So, take care of this place.
That little lifestyle change that you do,
don’t stop to wonder how that little thing
is going to impact the global scale..
Most of us make that mistake.
Two things we make.
The first mistake we make is we think our
contribution is too small in the grand scope
of things.
Sorry.
No!
The second mistake we make is.., Hey, not
in my lifetime..
The earth isn’t going to simply become uninhabitable
in my lifetime…
So, why should I bother…!
So, we lack this long-range thinking..
We lack scale thinking too.
If thousand people get together, and perform
small acts… like squirrels..
like sparrows…
We lack that thinking..
So, he advises us, take care!
And, finally, as a warning chapter, he talks
about the Apocalypse on one side.
Probably nuclear war, probably bio war, probably
Covid, a stronger version..
And on the other side, he talks about AI truly
becoming a global entity..
A Singularity.
Where AI invents AI..
And starts getting infinitely better, and
more powerful, and hopefully benign!
He talks about that.
So, to sum it all up, yes, all this is going
to happen in this world.
Progress will keep happening.
Setbacks will keep bothering.
Occasionally, we will face seemingly insurmountable
difficulties..
And, occasionally, near-miraculous advances
in technology will happen too..
Technology will save the day, he says!
This other book I chanced upon, this ALSO
talks about Pessimism.
The title of the book is, “The Psychology
of Money”.
Something I don’t know much about.
And, I am hence not going to talk about MONEY
here.
But, a chapter in this book..
I think the 17th chapter, talks about the
Seduction of Pessimism.
In the matters of money?
The Pessimist, the Doomsayer, the guy who
talks about collapses and destructions and
complete utter disasters?
He has a special place..
Everybody praises him, says the author.
And, why this seduction?
Particularly in the matter of money?
Well, the author has three reasons why.
The first is, even if it is a meteor crashing
into Earth, it will perhaps happen in some
corner of the world.. but, money?
Is ubiquitous..
Present everywhere..
If something affects one person, it ends up
affecting everybody.
The second thing he talks about that makes
money unique, that makes pessimism enjoyable,
is the prediction game the analysts, economists,
the Wall Street watchers get into.
With half-baked information and dangerous
half-knowledge.
They start talking about scenarios, eventualities,
conditions, results, situations!
And, they miss out on one thing…
When predicting something, because of your
act of prediction, it could wake up and move
in a different direction!
A cricket ball has been hit by the batsman,
you chase the ball, that is predictable.
A rabbit starts running, and the dog starts
chasing the rabbit..
Is that predictable?
Of course not!
Because, every move the rabbit makes, the
dog adjusts!
But, every adjustment the dog makes, the rabbit
readjusts!
So, it is a dynamic game!
And, finally, the third reason why it is seductive?
Good things take time..
They are glacially slow..
In the past hundred years, there have been
amazing leaps forward, improvement really
worth talking about.
Why isn’t it apparent?
That’s because, nobody writes about it..
But, one percent drop in the share price of
some particular stock, it becomes red…
it becomes…
read!
So, bad news spreads fast, and that’s again
why pessimism is seductive!
He also talks about one Iron Law of Economics.
He says, “Extremely good and extremely bad
circumstances rarely stay that way for long
because supply and demand adapt over time
in hard-to-predict ways”.
And finally, talking about the uses of Pessimism,
there is one “Mega Benefit” we need to
talk about.
If you can channelise it correctly…
In Christianity, what was Pessimism?
It was about the Fall of Man!
From a perfect heavenly Garden of Eden, Adam
and Eve are ejected because of their primal
sin.
And, to escape that sin is your job on earth.
Prepare for Heaven.
Atone for your sins.
In The Bhagavad Gita, just know, you are most
probably going to be let down, and so, shed
your ego, quit your desires, focus on the
task at hand, don’t expect the fruits of
your work!
What did The Buddha say?
He said, “Living is Suffering!
Not just once..
Multiple times.
Samsara Sagara..
You are going to keep suffering..
Break out!
Nirvana!
Moksha!”
That is how he took us forward!
So, attachment, suffering, living, attachment,
.. that was his train of thought.
When they took the essence of living, and
instead of looking at it as, “Why Me!?”,
they generalised it, universalised it, and
said, “Why Us?!” and there they were able
to create religions that stood the test of
time!
Closing thought!
When I look at this glass of water…
we brought in a lot of different perspectives
from different kinds of people.
Two important takeaways occurred to me though,
and I wanted to share them with you.
The first one is: “Hey, drink it man!
Don’t just sit there thinking about it!
If you are thirsty, DRINK!
Have a bias for ACTION!
Jump in!
Drink it!”
The other bias that we need to have is: “If
it were dirty water, you have the power to
empty it..
If it were top class filter coffee, hey, you
have the power to actually refill it!
Have the bias towards that growth mindset..
Don’t just mope, telling yourself that this
is what you have been blessed/cursed with!
What can you do?
Dirty?
Can you empty it?
Is it good?
Can you refill it?
Yes, you can!!”
That would be my closing thought!
Let us meet next week!
Thanks a lot!